# Revolutionizing Endangered Species Conservation: Employing Synthetic Satellite Data to Monitor and Protect Polar Bears
The polar bear (Ursus maritimus), a keystone species of the Arctic, holds immense importance for the world’s conservation and climate change efforts. As the apex predators of the Arctic food web, polar bears help maintain the balance of the Arctic ecosystem, and their habitat makes them a critical indicator of the impact of global warming. Although almost all traditional methods for tracking polar bear populations involve direct observation, this process can be logistically challenging and expensive in distant regions such as the Arctic. More recently, improvements to satellite technology have made tracking polar bears from space a promising alternative for monitoring the species. However, the cost of satellite imagery and expansive nature of the Arctic environment presents many challenges for acquiring the data necessary to identify and track polar bears. In this study, we propose a novel approach to monitoring the species by generating and using synthetic satellite imagery to train artificial intelligence (AI) to identify polar bears from space. We leverage Blender–a free and open-source 3D computer graphics software–to produce synthetic datasets of satellite images that accurately model the characteristics and environments of polar bears, including their size, shape and habitat. We then trained a YOLO object detection model on these datasets to identify the exact location of polar bears. By varying the ground sampling distance (GSD) of the synthetic datasets, we were able to determine the satellite image resolution required for polar bear identification and thus if current satellite constellations possess these requirements. Our results suggest that our approach can accurately identify polar bears from space on satellite hardware that is currently available today. Additionally, the YOLO model identified polar bears in real aerial images with backgrounds extremely dissimilar from the training set, showing its ability to generalize polar bear identification beyond the type of satellite images it was trained on. Models trained on synthetic images of lower GSD values generally showed better identification performance, achieving accuracies as high as 96.17%. This approach has the potential to significantly improve our ability to monitor and understand polar bear populations, as well as inform conservation efforts in the Arctic. Our approach can also be easily adapted to monitor other wildlife species from space and revolutionize a wide range of environmental and conservation efforts.

